Add Web SQL deprecation article (#3352)
GoogleChrome/developer.chrome.com: site/en/blog/deprecating-web-sql/index.md

---
layout: 'layouts/blog-post.njk'

> title: Deprecating Web SQL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Deprecating and removing Web SQL
```

Reviewer: If this article is going to be updated with the future status, then it's title needs to be broader.

> title: Deprecating Web SQL

Reviewer 2: And here I've always called it "WebSQL", without the space. Looks like people on the Internet do it both ways.

description: >
  The Web SQL Database standard was first proposed in April 2009 and abandoned in November 2010.
  While it was implemented in WebKit and remained active in Blink, Gecko never implemented this
  feature and WebKit deprecated it in 2019. The W3C encourages those needing web databases to adopt
  Web Storage or Indexed Database. Web SQL has been deprecated and removed for third-party contexts
  in Chromium 97. Now Chromium 105 deprecates Web SQL in insecure contexts. The complete removal of

>   the feature is planned for Chromium 107.

Reviewer 2: see below - we're not planning to remove WebSQL completely for a while. Sorry if docs were unclear!

alt: Filing cabinet symbolizing a database.
---

The [Web SQL Database](https://www.w3.org/TR/webdatabase/) proposal was first
[introduced in April 2009](https://www.w3.org/TR/2009/WD-webdatabase-20091222/) and
[abandoned in November 2010](https://www.w3.org/TR/webdatabase/#status-of-this-document). While it
was implemented in the WebKit browser engine (that powers Safari and early versions of Chrome) and
remained active in the Blink engine (that powers Chrome after the switch from WebKit), the Gecko
engine (that powers Firefox) never implemented this feature and
[WebKit deprecated it in 2019](https://lists.webkit.org/pipermail/webkit-dev/2019-November/030968.html).
The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C)
[encourages](https://www.w3.org/TR/webdatabase/#:~:text=The%20Web%20Applications%20Working%20Group%20continues%20work%20on%20two%20other%20storage%2Drelated%20specifications%3A%20Web%20Storage%20and%20Indexed%20Database%20API.)
those needing web databases to adopt
[Web Storage](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/Web_Storage_API) or
[Indexed Database](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/IndexedDB_API/Using_IndexedDB).

## Web SQL deprecation steps

> Now, in the Chromium project that browsers like Chrome and Edge are built upon, we're taking steps
> to deprecate Web SQL for good, too:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, in Chromium, which powers Chrome and Edge among others, we're 
deprecating Web SQL for good:
```

> - Web SQL has been deprecated and removed for **third-party contexts** in **Chromium&nbsp;97**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Web SQL was deprecated and removed for **third-party contexts** in **Chromium&nbsp;97**.
```

> - Web SQL access in **insecure contexts** is deprecated as of **Chromium&nbsp;105**.

Reviewer 2: We should make it clear that the only change in M105 is that there will be a warning in the Console. Also, my understanding is that, after our discussion, we're not going to remove in insecure contexts in M107.

Seeing this in your article, I realized that our canonical doc still says M107. I'm just confirming with the engineers that we've changed that.

More importantly, we're not planning to remove WebSQL in all contexts until sometime next year (TBD).

 We're not going to make this not work at all in insecure contexts until a date TBD.

Reviewer: I've made a rewording suggestion to something vague: "Watch this blog for later removal plans and updates."

- The **complete removal** of the feature is planned for **Chromium&nbsp;107**.

## Reasons for deprecating Web SQL

### Sustainability and security concerns

> The Web SQL specification cannot be implemented sustainably. The last version of the standard

Reviewer 2: I think it would be nice to say upfront that we're not planning to just remove WebSQL. In fact, we're planning to replace it with something that will be maintained by the open-source community, served as a package that can be updated at will, without the burden of introducing fixes and new features into browsers.

What's more, we're hoping that this example will help a new ecosystem of open-source databases will flourish! No more will browsers keep trying to create storage solutions that don't quite work right...

Reviewer: I've added text based on your comment to the introduction.

            // Execute SQL statement
            tx.executeSql(
              // SQL statement
              'insert into rainstorms values (?, ?)',
              // Arguments
              ['somber', 6],
              // Success callback
              function () {
                // Execute SQL statement
                tx.executeSql(
                  // SQL statement
                  'select * from rainstorms where mood = ?',
                  // Arguments
                  ['somber'],
                  // Success callback
                  function (tx, res) {
                    // Do something with the result
                    var row = res.rows.item(0);
                    console.log('rainstorm severity: ' + row.severity + ',  my mood: ' + row.mood);
                  },
                );
              },
            );
          },
        );
      },
      // Error callback
      function (err) {
        console.log('Transaction failed!: ' + err);
      },
      // Success callback);
      function () {
        console.log('Transaction succeeded!');
      },
    );
  },
);
```

{% Aside 'warning' %} This code is obsolete. Don't use it in practice. {% endAside %}

> If you run this code and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you were to run this code and
```

> [inspect the created table with Chrome DevTools](/docs/devtools/storage/websql/), this is the result
> that you get:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[inspect the created table with Chrome DevTools](/docs/devtools/storage/websql/), this is the result:
```

{% Img src="image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/MnkvXruPWsb89lFTynqX.png", alt="Inspecting the Web SQL section in Chrome DevTools shows a database called mydatabase with a table called rainstorms with the columns mood (textual) and severity (integer) that has one entry with a mood of somber and a severity of six.", width="800", height="187" %}

### Lack of implementor support

> Apart from the, from a today's point of view, arcane API shape, Mozilla had a lot of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apart from the arcane API shape (at least from today's point of view), Mozilla had many
```

[concerns](https://hacks.mozilla.org/2010/06/beyond-html5-database-apis-and-the-road-to-indexeddb/)
about Web SQL being built upon SQLite:

_"We don't think [SQLite] is the right basis for an API exposed to general web content, not least of
all because there isn't a credible, widely accepted standard that subsets SQL in a useful way.
Additionally, we don't want changes to SQLite to affect the web later, and don't think harnessing
major browser releases (and a web standard) to SQLite is prudent."_

> You can read up more on Mozilla's concerns in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can read about Mozilla's concerns in
```

[IRC logs](http://www.w3.org/2009/11/02-webapps-irc)), and the
[mailing list archives](http://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-webapps/2009OctDec/0526.html).
Additionally,
[Nolan Lawson's blog post](https://nolanlawson.com/2014/04/26/web-sql-database-in-memoriam/)
provides a good overview of what happened.

## Where to go from here

As pointed out in the introduction, the
[Web Storage](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/Web_Storage_API) and the
[Indexed Database](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/IndexedDB_API/Using_IndexedDB)
standards are good alternatives in many cases.

We're also working on a replacement for Web SQL based on SQLite implemented in Wasm, which will be
released in the near future. For developers looking for a drop-in replacement, we're investigating
if a shim script can be provided. The article will be updated once the replacement is ready.

## Feedback

If you have _any_ concerns about the deprecation steps communicated in this post, please let us know
on the [blink-dev mailing list](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/g/blink-dev). Membership in
this group is open to anyone, and anyone is allowed to post.

## Related links

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - [All deprecations and removals in Chromium](https://developer.chrome.com/tags/removals/)
```

---
layout: 'layouts/blog-post.njk'
title: Deprecating and removing Web SQL
description: >
  Web SQL was first proposed in April 2009 and abandoned in November 2010. Gecko never implemented
  it and WebKit deprecated it in 2019. Those needing web databases can use Web Storage or Indexed
  Database. Web SQL was removed for third-party contexts in Chromium 97. Chromium 105 deprecates Web

>   SQL in insecure contexts. Complete removal is planned for Chromium 107.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  SQL in insecure contexts. Watch this blog for later removal plans and updates.
```

authors:
  - thomassteiner

> date: 2022-08-02

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2022-08-04
```

> # updated: 2022-08-02

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# updated: 2022-08-04
```

alt: Filing cabinet symbolizing a database.
tags:
  - deprecations
  - removals
  - storage
---

The [Web SQL Database](https://www.w3.org/TR/webdatabase/) proposal was
[introduced in April 2009](https://www.w3.org/TR/2009/WD-webdatabase-20091222/) and
[abandoned in November 2010](https://www.w3.org/TR/webdatabase/#status-of-this-document). While it
was implemented in WebKit (which powers Safari and early versions of Chrome) and remained active in
the Blink engine (that powers Chrome after the switch from WebKit), Gecko (which powers Firefox)
never implemented this feature and
[WebKit deprecated it in 2019](https://lists.webkit.org/pipermail/webkit-dev/2019-November/030968.html).
The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C)
[encourages](https://www.w3.org/TR/webdatabase/#:~:text=The%20Web%20Applications%20Working%20Group%20continues%20work%20on%20two%20other%20storage%2Drelated%20specifications%3A%20Web%20Storage%20and%20Indexed%20Database%20API.)
those needing web databases to adopt
[Web Storage](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/Web_Storage_API) or
[Indexed Database](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/IndexedDB_API/Using_IndexedDB).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

We're not planning to just remove WebSQL. In fact, we're planning to replace it with something that will be maintained by the open-source community, served as a package that can be updated at will, without the burden of introducing fixes and new features into browsers.

What's more, we're hoping that this example will help a new ecosystem of open-source databases will flourish! No more will browsers keep trying to create storage solutions that don't quite work.

```

## Web SQL deprecation steps

Now, in Chromium, which powers Chrome and Edge among others, we're deprecating Web SQL for good:

- Web SQL was deprecated and removed for **third-party contexts** in **Chromium&nbsp;97**.
- Web SQL access in **insecure contexts** is deprecated as of **Chromium&nbsp;105**.

> - The **complete removal** of the feature is planned for **Chromium&nbsp;107**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Watch this blog for later removal plans and updates.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

We're not planning to just remove WebSQL. In fact, we're planning to replace it with something that will be maintained by the open-source community, served as a package that can be updated at will, without the burden of introducing fixes and new features into browsers.

What's more, we're hoping that this example will help a new ecosystem of open-source databases will flourish! No more will browsers keep trying to create storage solutions that don't quite work.
```

Additionally, we don't want changes to SQLite to affect the web later, and don't think harnessing
major browser releases (and a web standard) to SQLite is prudent."_

You can read about Mozilla's concerns in
[former Mozillan Vladimir Vukićević's blog post](https://web.archive.org/web/20090412154147/http://blog.vlad1.com/2009/04/06/html5-web-storage-and-sql/).
For some more history, check out the
[W3C Web Applications Working Group minutes](http://www.w3.org/2009/11/02-webapps-minutes.html#item10)
(and, if you really want to go into the details, the
[IRC logs](http://www.w3.org/2009/11/02-webapps-irc)), and the
[mailing list archives](http://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-webapps/2009OctDec/0526.html).
Additionally,
[Nolan Lawson's blog post](https://nolanlawson.com/2014/04/26/web-sql-database-in-memoriam/)
provides a good overview of what happened.

## Where to go from here

As pointed out in the introduction, the
[Web Storage](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/Web_Storage_API) and the
[Indexed Database](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/IndexedDB_API/Using_IndexedDB)
standards are good alternatives in many cases.

> We're also working on a replacement for Web SQL based on SQLite implemented in Wasm, which will be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also as stated, we're planning to replace WebSQL with something that will be maintained by the open-source community. 
We're also working on a replacement for Web SQL based on SQLite implemented in Wasm, which will be
```

---
layout: 'layouts/blog-post.njk'
title: Deprecating and removing Web SQL
description: >
  Web SQL was first proposed in April 2009 and abandoned in November 2010. Gecko never implemented
  it and WebKit removed it in 2019. Web SQL was removed for third-party contexts in Chromium 97. Now
  Chromium 105 deprecates Web SQL in insecure contexts and shows a warning in the DevTools Issue
  panel when the feature is used. Complete removal in insecure contexts and eventually all contexts
  is planned for later Chromium releases.
authors:
  - thomassteiner
date: 2022-08-31
# updated: 2022-08-31
hero: image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/yUp8lfaCt4EmxmVei3lj.jpg
alt: Filing cabinet symbolizing a database.
tags:

>   - deprecations

Author: ```suggestion
  - deprecations-removals
```

>   - removals

Author: ```suggestion
```

[introduced in April 2009](https://www.w3.org/TR/2009/WD-webdatabase-20091222/) and
[abandoned in November 2010](https://www.w3.org/TR/webdatabase/#status-of-this-document). While it
was implemented in WebKit (which powers Safari and early versions of Chrome) and remained active in
the Blink engine (that powers Chrome after the switch from WebKit), Gecko (which powers Firefox)
never implemented this feature and
[WebKit removed it in 2019](https://lists.webkit.org/pipermail/webkit-dev/2019-November/030968.html).

The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C)
[encourages](https://www.w3.org/TR/webdatabase/#:~:text=The%20Web%20Applications%20Working%20Group%20continues%20work%20on%20two%20other%20storage%2Drelated%20specifications%3A%20Web%20Storage%20and%20Indexed%20Database%20API.)
those needing web databases to adopt
[Web Storage API](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/Web_Storage_API) technologies like
[`localStorage`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/Window/localStorage) and
[`sessionStorage`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/Window/sessionStorage), or
[IndexedDB](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/IndexedDB_API/Using_IndexedDB). These

> technologies show their strenghts when it comes to key/value stores and structured data, but

Author: ```suggestion
technologies show their strengths when it comes to key/value stores and structured data, but
```

acknowledgely also have weaknesses like the lack of a strong query language. People want SQL on the
web for a reason.

{% Aside %} Our intention is to empower developers to create their own solutions for structured
storage and we're therefore working with the [SQLite](https://www.sqlite.org/index.html) team to
create a SQLite implementation over WebAssembly. This solution will replace Web SQL. {% endAside %}

## Web SQL deprecation steps

- [✅ Done.] Web SQL was deprecated and removed for **third-party contexts** in
  **Chromium&nbsp;97**.
- [📍 We are here.] Web SQL access in **insecure contexts** is deprecated as of
  **Chromium&nbsp;105** at which time a warning message will be shown in the Chrome DevTools Issue
  panel.

> {% Img src="image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/unDM9iaTcPDbedQ3dL84.png", alt="Chrome DevTools Issues panel with a warning that reads Web SQL in non-secure contexts is deprecated and will be removed in M107. Please use Web Storage or Indexed Database.", width="800", height="158" %}

Reviewer 2: If the `alt` text matches the image, we need to remove this, since it mentions the outdated M107 milestone. Sadly I just discovered that this warning is actually appearing in M105 beta, but we're going to change it in the next couple of weeks.

Sorry this has been so complicated!

Author: In this case let's just shorten the `alt` text.

> {% Img src="image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/unDM9iaTcPDbedQ3dL84.png", alt="Chrome DevTools Issues panel with a warning that reads Web SQL in non-secure contexts is deprecated and will be removed in M107. Please use Web Storage or Indexed Database.", width="800", height="158" %}

Author: ```suggestion
{% Img src="image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/unDM9iaTcPDbedQ3dL84.png", alt="Chrome DevTools Issues panel with a warning that reads Web SQL in non-secure contexts is deprecated.", width="800", height="158" %}
```
